Assignment was developed on Jupyter (as requested), this is why all components of this program are displayed in one single file, with perhaps an unusual layout.

General list of APIs from Chess.com: https://www.chess.com/news/view/published-data-api#pubapi-endpoint-games-archive-list
API used for leaderboard: https://api.chess.com/pub/leaderboards
API used for player games: https://api.chess.com/pub/player/{username}/games/{YYYY}/{MM}, where username, year and month need to be inputted

-- INTRO:

This program was written to explore the effect of online board games on a player's ability to play that game. The board game chosen for this study is Chess and the API was taken from Chess.com, one of the largest chess websites online. Chess was chosen due to the fact it can be measured objectively by the value of a player's rating as a player's rating is an objective representation of their playing ability (+/- a few points).

There are a number of different types of chess games and furthermore, there ar different time classes (60 sec, 3 min, 5 min etc.)playable on the site. For this study bullet chess, with classical chess rules was chosen. This time format gives both players 60 seconds on the clock with no time increment and was chosen because it is reasonable to assume that online chess would have thegreatest effect on shorter time formats, allowing players to make moves faster than they would otherwise in real life due to the speed permitted by the click of a mouse and additonally, enabling pre-moving (where a player can pre-move their next move before their opponent has moved) which allows a move to be made in 0.1 second and is otherwise impossible in real life.

*For the purpose of testing this program, it is noted that running it from beginning to end will take around 3 hours or so, this is due to number of players chosen as each player has a large number of games that are looped over in section 4 of the code. I have run and logged the data for the top 50 players which I will attempt to send within the zip file via brightspace, but if this proves difficult I will send the data files for the top 5 players (or so), where 'username' in section 3 can be changed from:

username = players(50, 'live_bullet') to username = players(5, 'live_bullet')

Either way if player data is provided in the zip file, section 4 (data collection) of this code does not need to be run for the code to work. Otherwise section 4 of the code can be tested by running section 3 with the number of players from the 'players' function used set to around 2 or 3 so that section 4 will be less time consuming in general.

If the code is run with less than the 50 players I ran it for the results of this investigation will differ, that is different graphs will be produced, but the functionality of the code can still be graded. I will attach the outputted plot(s) for the top 50 players within the zip file emailed to provide a reference for any conclusions gathered from this code.


-- CONCLUSION:

The graph produced in section 5 (attached in the zip file under 'Section5_PlayerTrendGraph') shows the logarithmic relationship between games played and change in rating, this represents how players see their greatest improvement over their initial 500 games (loosely read off graph in section 6, named 'Section6a_Trendline' in zip file) and then their rate of improvement slows down no matter how many more games they play. This is given by the the formula produced in section 6: y = (90.79).ln(x) + 23.88

Although the growth for all players follows this logarithmic shape (each player's data was inspected individually to confirm this) it is noted that there is a large error margin attached to this best-fit line, in the ball park of +/-600. This reveals that although there is a correlation between bullet games played on Chess.com and the subsequent rating change, there is most definitely other factors at play that effect a player's rating change on the website. This is expected, some of these factors may be a player's playing activity outside of the website, their age, their natural ability to learn and improve at chess or even the resources available to that individual to improve their game (plus many more factors I'm sure).

The colour scheme of the graph produced in section 5 has been set to show each player's rank, with higher rated players leaning towards red and lower rated players leaning towards yellow. This extra layer of information was added in the hope of observing any extra variations due to rank and it appears that higher rated bullet players have a tendency to play more games in general. This idea was further explored in section 6 where the total number of bullet games played by an individual was graphed against their change in rating, with the colour gradient kept the same (attached in the zip file under 'Section6b_BulletGamesVSRating') and it appears clearer that higher rated players do indeed play more games. An additional graph was produced in section 6 howing the number of total games players play, not including bullet games, against their (bullet) rating change (under 'Section6c_TotalGamesVSRating') and again, although less clear than before, it seems that higher rated players play more games. It is noted that these graphs show no correlation between total number of games played and total change in rank, this however expected as the previous (section 5) graph shows that after a certain number of games rating change is minimised, so any additional games should not relate to much change, this coupled with the fact that each player joined at a different rating makes it difficult to constrain any relationship with total number of games vs total rating change.

The take away from this investigation is that the change in a player's bullet rating on Chess.com follows a logarithmic fit, interestingly showing that most of a player's growth occurs between there first 500 games or so, furthermore if we wished to better constrain the accuracy of this log function, we would have to investigate more variables outside of the website. Additionally, better players have a tendency to play more games. This correlation does not prove causation (e.g. better players are inclined to be better paid and may have more time for online games) but outlines an interesting path for further future investigation.

In the future it may prove fruitful to compare player's online (Chess.com) rating to their official FIDE chess rating, to explore the effects of online chess more accurately, this could not be done for the purpose of this assignment as FIDE do not possess an open API. Additionally, it would be beneficial if some of the other factors present in a player's rating growth could be explored and accounted for in finding an encompassing representative function. As a general reflection, it also remains to be said that this investigation can always be improved with more data, through analysing more players.
